# Vectors
# Vector Creation
Vectors are the most basic object type in R. The function used to create vectors is `c()`.  One way to remember this is to think about combining values in to a vector.  

```rconsole
> my_vec <- c(1,2,3,6,5)
```

Vector properties
* data for a vector are stored in the order in which the vector was created (unordered)
* all values of the vector must be of the same data type (e.g., all character, numeric, or boolean)
* Specific values in a vector can be referenced by their position.  **NOTE: In R, all referencing begins with the value 1.  This differs from many other languages where referencing begins with 0.**


Creating the vector to represent the number of apples in your basket.

```rconsole
> vec <- c(5, 'apples')
> vec
```
Notice now that the the value 5 is in "", indicating that it is a character string... Assuming we ate one of those apples, we want to reduce the 5 to 4.

```rconsole
> vec[1] - 1
Error in vec[1] - 1 : non-numeric argument to binary operator
```
If your following along in R, this will throw an error. Since the value 5 is being treated as a character, or no different from a,b,c.. its impossible to subtract 1.

Now, let's create a new vector, called `my_vec`, but in this case we desire to expand or add to the vector. Lets add the value 7.

```rconcole
> my_vec <- c(1,2,3,6,5)

# add the value 7 to the end of the vector.  The next posiiton would be 6
> my_vec[6] <- 7
```
Thus, its simple to add a single value to the vector, but we can use a simiar pattern to combine vectors to create new longer vectors.

```rconsole
> my_vec
> my_vec2 <- c(100, 50, 76)

> new_long_vec <- c(my_vec, my_vec2)
```

In this, we created a third vector.  If we wanted We can assign it back to the original the original vector, overwriting the short version.

```rconsole
> my_vec
> my_vec <- c(my_vec, 100, 50, 76)
```

So, adding values to a vector is relatively simple.  Removing or deleting values is a litte different.  There is no explict function for remove or delete. However, there is an operator; the `-`.  As always, there are 2 methods to accomplish this task
```rconsole
> my_vec

> # Option 1: specify all of the values you want to KEEP. Here, everything but the value in position 3
> my_vec <- my_vec[c(1,2,4,5,6)]

> # Option 2: Use the -, which is really just a shorthand for option 1. 
> my_vec <- my_vec[-3]

> # remove the range values that were originally part of `my_vec2`
> my_vec <- myvec[-c(7:9)]
```

# Vector Operations
Now that we've created vectors how can we use them..  Lets assume that we have a vector of values, and we desire to increment all of the values in the vector by 10.

```rconsole
> vec_a <- c(1,10,20,30)
> vec_a + 10
```
You should see that every value is has 10 added to it.  Internally, R is doing the following:
```rconsole
> c(1,10,20,30) + c(10,10,10,10)
```

Knowing this we can utilize this to add different amounts to each element of a vector.

```rconsole
> c(4,5,6) + c(1,0,-1)
```

# Vector shortcuts
With vectors, there are things that we do often enought that the developers of R have created some shortcuts.

# Vector sequences
A vector that is continuous from 1 to 10.  Notice, here that I've ommitted the `c()`.  When appropriate, R understands what you want and will implictly return a vector.
```rconsole
> 1:10
```

A vector that spans 2 to 20 in increments of 2
```rconsole
> seq(from= 2, to= 20, by= 2)
```

# Repeats
In some cases, we want to create vectors that repeat identical values, or repeat an order.  This is ideal for creating dummy vectors for use in regression models.

Repeat the value 1 10 times
```rconsole
> rep(1, 10)
```

Repeating values are not limited to numbers. We can repeat text strings
```rconsole
> rep('I Like R', 4)
```

Further, we can repeat the ordered sequences.  Say we need to repeat the values `1,2,3` 10-times
```rconsole
> # long version
> rep(c(1,2,3), 10)

> # short version
> rep(1:3, 10)
```

# Vector Attributes (i.e., naming)
As shown above, we can reference specific values by their specific location or position wihtin the vector. While useful, this can become cumbersome, when writing long code files, or when you only look at the code periodically and try to recall what the *meaning* of `my_vec[1]` was.  To deal with this we can add attributed to the vector.  Attributes are additional bits of information. In this case, column names might be helpful to recall the meaning of the information stored in the vector.  

For example, we are writing some code for a population model of mid-continent mallard dynamics. We have a vector `S <- c(0.7, 0.65, 0.4,0.5)` that represent annual cohort specific survival rates.  Let's assume that we use the traditional ordering of values, AM,YM,AF,YF.  Generally, we don't have a problem remembering the value order.  In some cases, we might add a comment `#` string that says lists the order in which they are stored in the vecotr. However, a better way would be to incorporate that information directly into the vector.

```rconsole
> S <- c(0.7, 0.65, 0.4,0.5)

> # set the names of the vector
> names(S) <- c('AM', 'YM', 'AF', 'YF')  

> # Show value for 1st position. (Adult Males.)
> S[1]

> # Values may be referenced 2 different ways when named.
> S$AM

> S['AM']
> # recall the names of the vector
> names(S)
```

There are two things to note here.  So, far everything we have seen has been of the form object <- function, where the object being created is on the left and the function is on the right side of the assignment operator.  In this case, the form is function <- function. This is a case where the `names()` function is used to both *set* and *recall* the values stored in the names attribute..

On to Arrays.
