# Arrays & Matrices
An array is a collection of data element arranged in a multi-dimensional format.Matrices are a special case of an array which is limited to a 2-dimensional rectangular layout. 

All elements of arrays must be of the same data type, either character, numeric or boolean, and are created using the `array()` or `matrix()` functions.

```rconsole
> A <- matrix(c(1:6), nrow= 2, ncol = 3)

    [1,] [2,] [3,]
[1,]   1    3    5
[2,]   2    4    6
```

Notice that R fills column one first, followed by column 2, etc. This is refered to column major ordering. This is different from other languages or programs (ie., WinBUGS) which are row major, in that they fill across row 1, followed by row 2, etc.  

## Value referencing
Referencing values of arrays is similar to vectors and lists with the exception that we must identify which rows and colums are desired.  

An element in the m _th_ row and n _th_ colum is accessed by the expression A[m,n].

```rconsole
> A[2, 3]
[1] 6
```

Entire rows can be accessed via A[m, ].

```rconsole
> A[1, ]
[1] 1 3 5
```

Similarly, entire column are accessed through A[,n]
```rconsole
> A[,3]
[1] 5 6
```

It's also posible to extract a set of elements from a larger matrix, such as the first and 3rd columns

```rconsole
> A[,c(1,3)
     [,1] [,3]
[1,]    1    5
[2,]    2    6
```

If we assign names to the rows and columns of the matrix, then we can access the elements by name.

```rconsole
> dimnames(A) <- list(c("row1","row2"), c("col1", "col2", "col3"))
> A
     col1 col2 col3
row1    1    3    5
row2    2    4    6

> A["row2", "col1"]
[1] 2
```

## Matrix operations
There is matrix multiplication and multiplication of matrices, and they are different.
For example we can double the values in matrix A via

```rconsole
> A * 2
    [1,] [2,] [3,]
[1,]   1    6   10
[2,]   4    8   12
```
or multiplication by a consant. We can also multiply the matrix by a vector and R reports a result.  

```rconsole
> A * c(1, 0, -1)
    [,1] [,2] [,3]
[1,]    1    4    1
[2,]    0    0    0
[3,]   -3   -6   -3
```
Notice that the matrix returned form this operation multiplied the first row by the first elememt, second row by second element, etc.  For those familiar with matrix operations, this is not the expected result.  Proper matrix multiplication uses a different operator, `%*%` to siginify matrix operations. Proper matrix multiplication should result in the following

```rconsole
> A %*% c(1, 0, -1)
     [,1]
[1,]    0
[2,]    0
[3,]    0
```

As I discussed at the beginning, matrices in R are column major. In reality, column major and row major are simply the transpose of one another, or that column 1 in a column major matrix is equal to row 1 of a matrix that was row major.  

```rconsole
> A <- matrix(1:9, 3,3)
> B <- t(A)
```

The colums of 2 matrices having the same number of rows can be combined into larger matrices.

```rconsole
> mtx1 <- matrix(2,4,6, 3, 1)
> mtx1
     [,1]
[1,]    2
[2,]    4
[3,]    6

> mtx2 <- matrix(1:9, 3,3)
> mtx3 <- cbind(mtx1, mtx2)
    [,1] [,2] [,3] [,4]
[1,]   2    1    4    7
[2,]   4    2    5    8
[3,]   6    3    6    9
```
Of note here, is that the order in which the matrices are specified in the cbind function is kept.  Since mtx1 was specified first, it will appear as the first column.  If the order had been reversed mtx1 would have been the fourth column.
Row can be combined in a simialar fashion using `rbind()`

On occssion the object returned from a function might be a matrix, and it would be informative to get the number of rows and columns in the matrix

```rconsole
> dim(A)
[1] 2 3
```
This can be useful if we wanted to iterate over all of the rows in a matrix where the size of the matrix may change..


for(i in 1:dim(A)[1]){
	some row operation 
}

This is a good time to point out that beginning R users can find reading R code somewhatdifficult becuase R can be "nested".  The above code `dim(A)[1]` is an example of this.
This code is returning the first element of the vector returned by the function `dim()`.Albiet more code we could have written the code as such

```rconsole
> mtx_dim <- dim(A)
> mtx_dim[1]
```

Arrays and Matries are useful in R, but they are not used as much as other object types unless you operate deep in the modeling world.
