# Exercies

These excercies are meant to enforce what was talked about during the seminar, however they are also intended to stretch your thinking and experience with R.   In some cases, the questions are asking for some things that were not explictly covered during the discussion.  When suitable, hints are provided to help you along. If you get stuck search help (`?` or `??` from R console), google, or find me.

## Vectors

1. Define a vector named `x` that contains the values 6 and 10.  Define a second vector `y` with the values 2,8.  
  A. Using `x` and `y` define a new vector `z` that contains values from both `x` and `y`. 
  B. Multiply the first element of `x` by the second element of `y` and the second element of `x` by the first element of `y`.
  *Bonus:* The operation described in the question above requires a lot of typing. What might be a faster way to do this?

2. Identify which code snippets below are valid means of adding values to an exising vector named `vec <- c(1,2,3)` 
 * vec[4] <- 9
 * vec <- vec + 9
 * vec <- c(vec, 9)
 * vec[length + 1] <- 9
 * vec <- end(vec, 9)

3. Write R code to define the following vector `vec <- c(3, 6, 9, 12, 16, 18)`.  Looking at this sequence you can see that the values generally appear to be increasing by increments of 3's. Replace the incorrect value such that the all values in the vector are increments of 3's. 

4. Explain the action being performed in the following code.
    ```rconsole
    vec <- c(1,5, 67, 98, 103, 45, 78, 101)
    vec <- vec[-5]
    ```
5. Define the following 2 vectors:
    ```rconsole
    x <- c(4,2,6)
    y <- c(1,0,-1)
    ```

6. Decide what the result will be from the following operations
  * length(x)
  * sum(x)
  * sum(x^2)
  * x+y
  * x\*y
  * x-2
  * x^2

7. Type the following code
    ```rconsole
    vec <- c('a', 'b', 5, 'c')
    vec[3] + 5
    ```
 1. What does R console return from this?  Explain (think) why this runs fine or why this failed.

 2. Take the square root (*hint:* square root function `sqrt()`)

 3. Create a vector that **rep**eats your name 4 times. 

Sequences are frequently used in R, and thus there are a number of ways to generate them. Sometimes, we desire the sequence to be a continuous set of numbers, while other cases demand that the the sequence skip numbers.

8. Create a **seq**uence assigned to an object called my\_seq that has continuous values from 1:10.  

9. Create a **seq**uence assigned to an object called new\_seq that contains all of the even numbers from 2:20. (*hint:* there is no need to manually create the vector [i.e., c(2,4,6..)])

## Matrices

1. Create a matrix filled with one's that has has 4 rows and 5 columns

2. Write the R code necessary to re-create the following matrix:
    ```rconsole
         [,1] [,2] [,3] [,4] [,5]
    [1,]   1    2    3    4    5
    [2,]   6    7    8    9   10
    [3,]  11   12   13    14  15
    [4,]  16   17   18    19  20
    ```
    (Hint:  consult help file for the matrix function)

3. Subset the above matrix to report the following
    ```rconsole
          [,1] [,2]
    [1,]    1    2
    [2,]    6    7
    ```

4. Using the matrix from question 2 above. Pull out the **diag**onal into a new vector.

5. In statistics, we occasionally need to multiply a matrix by an Identity matrix (e.g., a matrix of 1's on the diagonal).  Create a 4 x 4 identity matrix. (*hint:* The function from the previous question might help.)

